consensus decision making (#113)
rust-lang/lang-team: src/decision_process/examples.md

contact the team leads and receive the go-ahead. They can then write:

> @rustbot merge
>
> I propose to merge this proposal. I think it will be a great addition to
> Rust!

This indicates that they would like to merge the proposal. At the moment, there
is no decision pending, so rustbot would add a comment that looks like the
following:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or
> cancels it).
>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | |
> | @Grace | |
> | @Niklaus | |

As the comment says, the PR is now in "pending decision" state, with Alan
having kicked off the process with a proposal to merge. Alan's status of
**merge** will link to his comment.

Now, for this particular proposal, Barbara has a concern. She thinks that the
proposal has overlooked an important consideration. She writes a comment:

> @rustbot hold
>
> Did you consider reversing the polarity? Or the impact on the flux capacitor?

> At this point, rustbot updates the state:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, rustbot updates the state; Barbara's status of
**hold** will link to her comment:
```

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: I cannot tell if you have deliberately changed the rustbot authored text from what was written above, or if the text here is meant to be kept in sync with the text above. I assume the latter, and will write a suggestion accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```

Reviewer: The reason I took the time to correct this in every occurrence I could find (see below) is that I think it is important that the rustbot text uses the same terminology that appears in the table and/or in our commands.

I.e. it is confusing for rustbot to talk about "pauses or suspends" and then for a third word, "hold", to show up in the table.

> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | **hold** |
> | @Grace | |
> | @Niklaus | |

> Alan is currently busy at work, though, so by by the time that he and Barbara

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alan is currently busy at work, though, so by the time that he and Barbara
```

Author: Will fix that in a follow-up PR.

from rustbot after a week or so.) Once they get a chance to talk, Alan
fully addresses Barbara's concern, so Barbara posts:

> @rustbot merge

The comment is updated:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: (see above)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or
> cancels it).
```

>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | ~~hold~~ **merge** |
> | @Grace | |
> | @Niklaus | |

Barbara's previous ~~hold~~ status links to her previous comment setting her
status to `hold`, and her current **merge** status links to her more recent
comment setting her status to `merge`.

> At this point, all the statuses are either empty, **abstain**, or **merge**,

Reviewer: (no instances of "abstain" appear in the example as written. Its not a problem, per se, since I can infer how it would work. But the text might be clearer if you added an instance of it for Grace or Niklaus...)

and more than 10 days have passed since the FCP started. Therefore, it
completes immediately.

## Authoring an RFC (illustration of `rustbot restart`)

After some time, the proposal is completed and an RFC is proposed. This is a
reversible decision. Alan, as the liaison, proposes to merge the RFC with
`@rustbot merge`, and the decision making process proceeds as above.

This time, Niklaus has a concern:

> @rustbot hold
>
> I have not had time to read this yet! Give me a bit of time to write it up.

> After 7 days have passed, rustbot writes to her:

Reviewer: I think the "cast of characters" text has established that Niklaus identifies as male.

```suggestion
After 7 days have passed, rustbot writes to him:
```

> @Niklaus, I see you have placed a hold but 7 days have passed. Are you any
> closer to reaching a decision? (cc @Alan)

This continues for a week or two while Alan and Niklaus play "email tag". In
the interim, Barbara decides she agrees with the RFC, so she uses `@rustbot
merge` as well. The status now looks like this:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this PR. This is a **reversible
> decision**, which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment

> > period" of 10 days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> period" of 10 days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```

> decision.
>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | **merge** |
> | @Grace | |
> | @Niklaus | **hold** |

Eventually, Alan and Niklaus find a time to discuss, and Alan agrees that
Niklaus's concerns are valid, so he makes some major edits to the RFC. Given
that the RFC is completely different, he decides to restart the clock and
writes:

> @rustbot restart

> This clears the state of all team members (preserving the history) and begins

Reviewer: Hmm. I was for a moment confused by the combination of "clears the state" and "preserves the history." The example I think does demonstrate the outcome. Still, maybe this phrasing would be better:

```suggestion
This strikes out the state of all team members (clearing their entries while preserving the history) and begins
```

Author: I rephrased this, as well as the corresponding language in the reference.

the clock anew. rustbot also pings the relevant team members:

> Dear @rust-lang/team, @Alan has restarted the clock!

The status now looks like this:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```

>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | ~~merge~~ |
> | @Grace | |
> | @Niklaus | ~~hold~~ |

Barbara can use `@rustbot merge` to re-affirm her **merge** status, and Niklaus
can use `@rustbot merge` to set his own status to **merge** since he agrees
with the resolution of his concern.

## Authoring an RFC continued (Overriding a concern)

At this point, Grace has a concern, and explains that concern in detail:

> @rustbot hold
>
> I've thought about this a lot, and I don't think we should do this. Now that
> I see the syntax used in practice, I feel like if we do this it'll have an
> adverse effect on the ecosystem...

The status now looks like this:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```

> What about...

Over the course of a few subsequent meetings and side conversations, Grace and
other team members discuss the concern further; the initiative owner also
considers the concern, and raises it with others working on the initiative.

The owner of the initiative updates the RFC to include a discussion of a couple
of alternative syntax proposals. The owner recommends a slightly modified
version of the originally proposed syntax, and outlines criteria that they feel
the syntax should meet in order to support the use case.

Grace agrees that her concern has been understood, but does not agree with the
proposed syntax. Grace feels the new proposal is an improvement, but her
concern remains.

Niklaus feels that the team has understood Grace's concern, and furthermore,
that the updated proposal addresses Grace's concern:

> @rustbot merge
>
> I appreciate the potential impact this may have on the ecosystem. However, I
> feel that as now described in section XYZ of the RFC, the value of A
> outweighs the risk of B, and we've now mitigated the potential risk by...

(Notice that while Niklaus feels that the team has understood Grace's concern,

> he does not use "We" in his response, and does not imply that his summary

Reviewer: Well, Niklaus *did* use "we", namely in:

> and we've now mitigated the potential risk by...

Am I nitpicking? I don't know. I think the detail the text is pointing out here is super-important, in terms of emphasizing clarity in attributing which opinions belong to individuals, and which belong to the team as a whole.

Maybe easiest to just rewrite Niklaus's comment to eschew "we" 100%?

E.g.

"outweighs the risk of B, and it now mitigates the potential risk by..."

Author: I don't think you're nitpicking at all. I reworded the guidance here to "does not speak for the entire team" rather than tabooing the word "we". However, I also rewrote the sentence to change "we've" to an "I think" phrasing instead.

represents the entire team. Niklaus is just withdrawing his own support for the
concern.)

At this point, the entire team other than Grace agrees that the proposal should
move forward:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```

>
> | Team member | State |
> | --- | --- |
> | @Alan | **merge** |
> | @Barbara | ~~merge~~ **merge** |
> | @Grace | **hold** |
> | @Niklaus | ~~hold~~ ~~merge~~ ~~hold~~ **merge**|

(We'll assume, for this example, that Grace does not manage to convince anyone
else.)

Grace takes some time, working with the RFC author, to add a dissent, including
a specific unresolved question.

Grace then writes a comment containing `@rustbot dissent`. (If necessary, or if
Grace would prefer, another team member may issue `@rustbot @grace dissent` on
her behalf.) The status now looks like this:

> Hello! @Alan has proposed to merge this. This is a **reversible decision**,
> which means that it will be affirmed once the "final comment period" of 10

> > days have passed, unless a team member pauses or suspends the decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> days have passed, unless a team member places a "hold" on the decision (or cancels it).
```
